Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to improve the create feature of our application.
In other words, we are going to write web browser based JavaScript to intercept the default behavior
of submitting a form and instead use an asynchronous or on the fly request to send the user's typed
in value to our server.
And then once our server and database have had a chance to complete that new create action, we will
again use browser based JavaScript to add the new item to the bottom of our list here.
And all of this will happen on the fly without the need for a full page reload or re render.
Without further ado, let's get started.
Our first step is to jump into our text editor and make sure that we have open our browser jazz file.
We need to write browser based JavaScript to detect the submit event for that create form.
So let's do this up at the very, very top of this file.
Let's add a new line at the top, and let's write a comment just to stay organized and say Create feature.
All right now we want to begin by selecting that each HTML form element.
Let me show you what I mean.
So right now, jump into your server dot js file and scroll down until you see the HTML template right
after this first chunk of code.
Then we see this form area.
So here is the opening form tag, and we just want to give it a unique I.D. so that it's very easy to
select with JavaScript.
So do this with me right after the word form say I.D. equals and then quotes, and we can make up any
ID name we want.
But let's go with create dash form.
Cool.
Now, while we're at it, let's also give a unique ID to the input field that the user actually types
into.
So just one or two lines down from that opening form tag.
We see this input element.
And let's also give it an ID and say equals quotes, and I will make up a name of create dash field.
And finally, while we are still in this file, scroll down a little bit more and on this opening unordered
list tag or this other element, let's also give it an ID.
So right after you'll say ID equals quotes and I will name it.
Item Dash List.
Cool.
So now we have these ideas that we can hook onto from within our browser JavaScript.
So let's save this file and jump back into browser JS.
All right, now, up at the top for our Create feature, let's select that form element.
So let's say Document Dot get element by IED in parentheses to call that method.
And then in the parentheses we just say quotes and the name of the IDE.
So we named it create form.
This will select that form element, and then we just want to add on to the end of it and say, Dot
Add event listener.
We give this method to arguments, so a card will be the first argument is the event for that element
that we're looking out for.
So instead of click, we are interested in the submit event because there's multiple ways to submit
a form, right?
You could click on the submit button or you could just press the enter or return key on your keyboard
while you're in this field.
So this event will take care of either of those cases, which is perfect.
All right.
And then instead of this be placeholder, this is where we provide a function that will be called when
this event actually happens.
So let's get rid of the B and C function parentheses, curly brackets.
All right.
And now within the body of this function.
This is our chance to prevent the default behavior of the web browser, meaning we don't actually want
to send off a traditional request to the server.
So let's do this within the parentheses for that anonymous function that we just created.
Let's include a parameter, and let's name it e.
This will contain all sorts of information about the event that just took place now within the body
of our function.
We can use that and look inside it and say, Prevent default.
Let's test this out really quick.
So go ahead and save this file and then jump into the browser.
Be sure to refresh.
And now if I try to submit this form.
Notice that nothing happens no matter how many times I try to submit, this is perfect.
So now we just want to use JavaScript to extract whatever value the user had typed in and then use Axios
to send off an asynchronous request to our node server.
So let's jump back into our text editor and write below this e dot prevent default line.
Let's add a new line, and in order to save a lot of typing, let's just recycle or copy and paste our
Axios code from down here within our Delete feature.
Let's just copy these five.
Lines of code, so select from right before the A in Axios, down until the closing curly brackets and
parentheses, let's copy that into our clipboard and then up here right after the E Dot prevent default.
Just paste in your clipboard.
Cool.
Now, let's adjust this code to make sense for the create action instead of the delete action.
So for the URL that we want to send a post request to, let's change this from delete to create dash
item.
All right.
In terms of the data that we want to send to the server in this request, we don't need to send an IED.
Instead, we need to send along the text that the user just typed into our field.
So let's do this instead of ID here, let's say text, you can make up any property name.
This is fitting and then let's get rid of its current value.
So get rid of it.
OK, target, get attribute, delete up until the closing quotes and closing parentheses.
For now, let's just place an X here as a placeholder.
Now what we really need to do here is select this input field that we gave a unique ID to and then extract
its value.
Now I'm going to read the future and let you know that we are going to need to work with this element
more than once.
So instead of having to repeatedly select this element, let's just create a variable that points towards
it and then we can reuse that variable.
So back in our code up at the very, very top right after our comment, let's add a new line and I'm
going to create a variable.
So say let and let's be on the same page and let's name this variable create field and let's set it
to equal.
And then this is where we actually select that HTML input field so we can see document Typekit element
by idea.
And remember, a few minutes ago we named it create dash field.
Cool.
So now we can reuse this variable whenever we need to access or work with that element.
So within our Axios block of code here, instead of this X placeholder, let's get rid of that.
And let's just use that variable create field and look inside it with a dot for its value.
Awesome.
So we are sending an asynchronous or on the fly post request to this URL, and the data that we're sending
to the server is an object with a property of text, and it will have whatever value the user typed
in.
Now below this, this line of code is what's actually going to run once our server responds.
So let's delete this current line here, and let's write a comment to ourselves to stay organized and
say Create the HTML for a new item.
All right, and we will circle back to this task a bit later on in the lesson for the time being right
below that comment.
Just as a test, we can create an annoying alert pop up that says you just created a new item.
OK, but big picture what we will actually want to do here is create a new list item and add it to the
bottom of this unordered list.
However, before we set that up, we should adjust what our node app or express server does when it
receives a post request to this URL.
So go ahead and save this file and then jump in to our server J.S. file.
If we scroll down towards the bottom, you'll remember that we already set up this area that begins
with app post and then the URL is create item.
Well, right now, let's just make a couple of adjustments so that this code makes sense for our new
situation.
First of all, when we call the insert one method on our database collection in terms of the value that
we are setting for the text property, instead of looking in the request body for a property named item,
we want to replace this item with text because remember, that's the property name that we just chose
when we were setting up our asynchronous request.
OK.
Also, once this database action completes, instead of redirecting the browser back to the home page
for a full page reload, let's instead get rid of this line and say Response Dot Send.
And for now, let's just send back the word success.
OK, now let's go ahead and test everything out so far, so be sure to save this file and then jump
into the browser and refresh.
And if I type into this field by T and submit, we see this alert pop up, you just created a new item.
Now we don't see the item added to the bottom of our list because we haven't written that code yet.
That's to be expected, but let's make sure that by T was successfully added to our database.
So right now, jump into your MongoDB Atlas account and within your to do app item's collection.
You can click on Find or Reset Pull in the newest data.
Cool.
I can see the.
Total document count just increased from five to six, and if I scroll down here is that newest bitey
item.
Awesome.
So are asynchronous request is successfully adding new items to the database.
Now we just need to take care of the JavaScript that will add a new list item down here on the fly.
So let's jump back into our text editor and within browser, not J.S. Find the comment that says create
the HTML for a new item.
This is the area we're interested in, and we don't actually want to show this annoying alert pop up.
So get rid of that line and in its place, let's select that unordered list element that we want to
add on to.
So Document Dot get element by.
I'd call that method, and the idea of that list was Item Dash List.
OK, and once we've selected that element, we want to tack on and call a method named insert adjacent
each HTML.
We give this method to arguments so a comma be.
The first argument is where you want to add on the new HTML.
So in this case, instead of a placeholder, we are interested in quotes and we just say before and
meaning right before the ending or closing, you'll tag.
We want to add in a bit of new HTML.
And the second argument the B placeholder is the HTML that we actually want to add.
So check this instead of B.
For now, let's just say quotes and say Hello.
Cool.
Now, let's test this out, so go ahead and save the file and then back in the browser refresh.
Let me zoom out so you can see the bottom of the screen.
Here we go.
And if I type in by Berris and submit the form, you can see that on the fly.
Hello was added at the end of that overall list element.
So now, instead of simply the word hello, we just need to insert the HTML for this list item template,
right?
The template that's going to give us the text on the left with these two buttons on the right.
So let's do this back in our text editor.
Just so this line of code doesn't become so long that it's impossible to read.
Let's first do this for the second argument.
Let's get rid of the quotes.
Hello.
And instead, let's call a function that we can create in just a minute from now.
The name doesn't matter, but just so we're on the same page.
Let's call it item template in parentheses to call that function.
OK, now let's go create a function with that name.
So maybe up at the very, very top of our file, even above this create feature comment, let's add
a new line.
Let's create a function with the name of item template parentheses, curly brackets and within the body
of the function.
Let's just return a template literal.
So back, tex.
And for now, let's just say hello from a function.
Let's go ahead and save this just to make sure it's working and then refresh in the browser.
And if I type in the new items, if I say buy bananas and submit, you can see hello from a function.
Cool.
So now we have an organized place where we can include a lengthy bit of HTML code.
Now we do not need to write any new HTML.
We already have that HTML template within our server tags file.
So do this jump into server, not just scroll up until you see the HTML template, and we are specifically
looking for this unordered list element.
Remember, this is where we called map on our items array to do this once for each item.
So let's just copy and paste this HTML template.
Begin selecting right before this opening back tick and then just grab all the way down until the closing
back tick.
So copy that in your clipboard and then back in Browser Dot.
Yes, we can get rid of the hello from a function back, Tex.
So we just return and then paste in your clipboard.
Now, if every instinct in your body is telling you that it's bad to have duplicated code like this
in two separate files, don't worry your instincts are correct.
And in our next lesson, we will learn how to remove that duplication.
But for now in this lesson, let's not worry about that.
For right now, what I want us to focus our worry on is the MongoDB I.D. for our new document that we
just created.
Or in other words, how can we have the web browser be aware of that unique MongoDB I.D. that was just
created so that we can add it on to the new edit and delete buttons for the newly created item?
Right?
Because theoretically, someone could create a brand new item, have the HTML show up on the fly, and
then they could immediately want to click the new delete button.
And in order for that delete button to work, it would have to know.
The idea for that MongoDB document now back in our code.
This is not going to refer to anything within the context of this function.
We do not have a property named item to look within to grab the ID.
But let's do this.
I want you to jump in to your server logs.
File and scroll down until you find the apt up post area for the Create item URL.
Now, in terms of the response that we send back to the web browser instead of just sending a string
of text that says success, let's get rid of that line and instead say response dot, JSON and JSON
just stands for JavaScript object notation.
This is a very popular way of sending data back and forth.
And our goal here is to simply send back a JavaScript object that represents the new MongoDB document
that was just created.
So check this out within these parentheses for this function.
That's going to run as soon as the database action is complete.
Let's add a couple of parameters let's say e r for error, and let's also say info.
Now, check this out within the body of this function, where we say response dot JSON.
Let's just return an object with one property named Underscore ID, and we'll give that a value of info.
Dot and MongoDB has a property called inserted and then uppercase for ID comma.
Let's also give it a property of text and give that a value of request.
Body Typekit text.
All right, let's go ahead and save this file and then jump back into browser logs.
And let's do this within our Create Feature code within our Axios request.
Once this request is complete, it's going to call this function that we provide here.
Now we know that our node server is sending back data as its response, and Axios makes it very easy
to access that data.
So within these parentheses for this function here, let's just include a parameter and name it response.
Right?
This is the server's response back to the browser now within the body of this function on this line
of code where we are adding new HTML to the end of that unordered list.
Towards the end of this line, when we are calling our item template function well, let's just pass
that function a bit of data.
So within these parentheses, let's say response dot data and that will access that JavaScript object
that represents the newest document in the database that the server is sending back to our browser.
So now all we need to do is go up towards the very top of our new item template function that we just
created and within its parentheses just include a parameter with the name of item.
So now all of these references to Item Dot Text and Item ID will make sense.
Let's go ahead and save that and test it out by refresh.
Let me delete a few of these.
We can actually see the bottom of the screen here.
And if I say by apricots, you can see that was added on the fly.
And more importantly, if I tried to edit or delete that item, so if I click, edit and change it to
buy apricots today we see that change took place, meaning these edit and delete buttons that were added
to the page on the fly also have the correct Mongo DB I.D. associated with them just to prove that's
working if I go into my MongoDB Atlas account and refresh.
Awesome.
You can see it was updated to buy apricots today for our final task.
In this lesson, let's improve the user experience a bit so that when you submit this form, the field
is deleted or cleared out for you.
Right, the users should not have to manually delete their previous value.
So back in browser logs within our Create Feature area right below this create HTML comment, let's
add a new line right below this document git element line.
And let's just say create field.
That's the name of the variable that points towards the field element, let's say dot value and set
it to just an empty string to clear out its value.
Let's also refocus the user's cursor onto that field, so create field.
Call the focus method, give that a save and test it out.
So be sure to refresh on the front end.
If I say buy strawberries, we see that not only did add it at the bottom of our list, but I don't
even need to take my hands off the keyboard and I can just type in a new item by tomatoes.
Awesome.
And that's going to bring this lesson to a close.
In our next lesson, we will complete this application.
We are going to learn how to remove that duplication of the item HTML template so that it's not awkwardly
sitting in both our backend code and our front end code.
Let's keep things rolling, and I will see you then.